# Getting started


## 0. Requirements

Python >=3.7

anaconda/miniconda >=4.3

MongoDB >=4.0.0

## 1. Install MongoDB

Get MongoDB (community edition) and set it up following their documentation.

https://www.mongodb.com/download-center/community

The following accounts are a suggested way to set up the database.

You'll need an account with the role `userAdminAnyDatabase` to manage other accounts.

Then create a user with the `dbAdmin` role for the databases `bifrost_species` and `bifrost_prod`.
This will be the account that will setup the `bifrost_species` database and the indexes for both dbs.

Switch to the `bifrost_prod` database and create another user with `read` role for `bifrost_species` and `readWrite` for `bifrost_prod`.
This user will be the one bifrost will use. The `bifrost_species` account doesn't need to be updated on a routine basis.

## 2. Create the species database

The system relies on a species collection containing species-specific information used for
QC testing.

2.1 Create a database in MongoDB `bifrost_species`.
2.2 Import the file "setup/species.json" in the newly created database.
The command will look something like this (use the user with `dbAdmin` role):

```bash
mongoimport --host <host> --port <port> --username <dbuser> --authenticationDatabase admin --db bifrost_species --collection species
```

You can find more information about the mongoimport command here: https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/reference/program/mongoimport/

Here is an example of an entry in the species database:

```
{
    "_id" : ___, # mongoDB autogenerated id
    "organism" : "E. coli",
    "group" : "Escherichia", # Can be used as an alternative name
    "mlst_species" : "/path_to_db/ariba/mlst/Escherichia_coli_1/ref_db/", # Used by the mlst component
    "ncbi_species" : "Escherichia coli", # Matches kraken output.
    "min_length" : 4500000, #min and max genome size to pass QC
    "max_length" : 5800000
}
```

Note: We are in the process of simplifying the species DB

After this step you should have a mongodb instance running, a user and a species collection with the species you expect to find in the samples.

## 3. Add the indexes to the database

Add the indexes in setup/DBIndexes.js to the bifrost_prod database.

## 4. Download and install bifrost

```
git clone git@github.com:ssi-dk/bifrost.git
cd bifrost/setup
bash install.sh
```

## 5. Save the mongo db keys

Create a text file containing the mongodb uri for the serumqc_prod database with the "read" user credentials.

`mongodb://username:password@host:port/bifrost_prod`

Save this file in the `<bifrost repo>/resources` directory as `keys.txt`


## 6. Adjusting config

Copy `<bifrost repo>/setup/default_config.yaml` to `<bifrost repo>/config.yaml` and adjust the parameters.



## Running bifrost:

Activate conda environment `bifrost`:

```bash
source activate bifrost
```

Create output directory, and move into it:

```bash
mkdir run_name # Run name will be taken from the directory name or it can be set through config
cd run_name
```

Link the demultiplexed (fastq.gz) samples folder as samples (by default):

```bash
ln -s path/to/run samples
```

Copy/clone this directory in src directory:

```bash
git clone git@github.com:ssi-dk/bifrost.git # Or copy from your downloaded version.
mv bifrost src
```

Run snakemake to generate the run command and the folder structures.

Set the components you want to run (component names are the filenames in /components dir).

Use `use_mongodb=False` in config if you don't want to store the run, samples and results in the database.
For now however, you need to use the database to access the species table to run mlst.

Then start the program running:

```
snakemake -s src/bifrost.smk
```

You can change any option in config.yaml using the `--config` argument. Here is an example with some useful ones:

```
--config components=qcquickie,assemblatron,analyzer partition=project run_name=myrun assembly_with=spades
```

For more info on each parameter, check the sample config file.
